ABSTRACT Our society produces and shares overwhelming amounts of information through the Online Social Networks (OSNs). Within this environment, misinformation and disinformation have proliferated, becoming a public safety concern on every country. Allowing the public and professionals to efficiently find reliable evidence about the factual veracity of a claim is crucial to mitigate this harmful spread. To this end, we propose FacTeR-Check, a multilingual architecture for semi- automated fact-checking that can be used for either the general public but also useful for fact- checking organisations. FacTeR-Check enables retrieving fact-checked information, unchecked claims verification and tracking dangerous information over social media. This architectures involves several modules developed to evaluate semantic similarity, to calculate natural language inference and to retrieve information from Online Social Networks. The union of all these modules builds a semi-automated fact-checking tool able of verifying new claims, to extract related evidence, and to track the evolution of a hoax on a OSN. While individual modules are validated on related benchmarks (mainly MSTS and SICK), the complete architecture is validated using a new dataset called NLI19-SP that is publicly released with COVID-19 related hoaxes and tweets from Spanish social media. Our results show state-of-the-art performance on the individual benchmarks, as well as producing useful analysis of the evolution over time of 61 different hoaxes. Keywords Misinformation, Transformers, COVID-19, Hoax, Natural Language Inference, Semantic Similarity Introduction Misinformation and disinformation are two terms that resound since a long time. Inaccurate information has been largely used for varied purposes for decades and centuries. However, the emergence of Internet, Online Social Networks and Instant Messaging Services has undoubtedly facilitated its rapid creation and diffusion. These two terms reflect a problem that continues to expand and which involves an increasing concern to society. Yet, there are important differences between both terms: while misinformation involves inaccurate information propagated without knowing it is false, disinformation involves disseminating deliberately false information in order to deceive people1. The COVID-19 pandemic has undoubtedly drawn attention to this problem, when misinformation and disinformation meet health and affect public safety. From the initiation of this pandemic, an incessant repetition of falsehoods has been generated and propagated, undermining the work of health authorities in the fight against COVID-19. False reports about its origin, its death rate, or about vaccines have been a constant threat to control this virus. Fact-checking organisations are on the forefront combating the propagation of false claims, where intensive work is done to deny hoaxes that circulate through different channels, such as Online Social Networks (OSNs), Instant Messaging Services or Mass Media. This verification process conducted by these companies is mostly carried out by hand, however, it is barely reflected in OSNs. Users of these platforms share fake information without even realising it is indeed a falsehood or deliberately posting false claims without further consequences. Recent advances in Natural Language Processing, such as the Transformer architecture [1], allow to deal with complex human language for a plethora of tasks, such as summarization, translation, sequence classification, question answering or context-aware sentences similarity evaluation. In this research, we leverage the most recent advances in Natural Language Processing to develop a semantic-aware multilingual Transformer-based architecture for semantic similarity evaluation, semi-automated fact-checking and tracking of information pieces in Online Social Networks. We present an architecture that, on the one hand, can help general public in checking the veracity of a claim (i.e. a tweet) through context-aware automated comparison against a databases of hoaxes. On the other hand, our proposal aims at providing useful tools for fact-checking organisations for tracking and monitoring hoaxes circulating in OSNs. To validate and to show the capabilities of the architecture proposed, we use the COVID-19 pandemic scenario in Spanish speaking countries. We manually selected 61 hoaxes related to Covid-19 and extracted related tweets using Twitter API. Our architecture allows to label the degree of entailment of these tweets with a hoax, providing a useful insight into the propagation of hoaxes in Spanish on Twitter throughout one year. In summary, this research presents the following contributions: A labelled dataset of Spanish tweets IDs with the degree of entailment against a list of 61 hoaxes. A context-aware multilingual semantic similarity method for searching hoaxes with high similarity to a given query. A Natural Language Inference model for semi-automated fact-checking. A deep insight of misinformation and disinformation circulating on Twitter related to Covid-19 in Spanish speaking countries. The remaining sections of this manuscript are organised as follows. Conclusion In this article we have proposed FacTr-Check to mitigate OSN misinformation. Our architecture proposes two pipelines, one for semi-automated verification of claims; another for tracking known hoaxes on social media. The pipelines share three modules: a semantic similarity module, a NLI module and a information retrieval module. Using semantic similarity to find related fact-checks and NLI to contrast the claim to reputable sources we are able to semi-automatically verify information. On the other hand, to track hoaxes, we retrieve tweets related to a hoax, filtering the most relevant tweets with semantic similarity and contrasting them with the original hoax, finding how this particular piece of misinformation has spread along a social media platform. While our validation has been limited to COVID-19 and Twitter we want to emphasise that our architecture is adaptable to other knowledge domains as well as other social networks. First we evaluate all three modules individually, then the modules are put together in both pipelines to test their joint performance. To begin with, the similarity module offers above average performance using multilingual models on the STS benchmark. The NLI module uses XLM-RoBERTa fine-tuned on XNLI and the SICK training dataset, which performs adequately on SICK test, offering similar results to state-of-the-art models, as well as offering multilingual capabilities. Finally, the information retrieval module is compared against KeyBERT and RAKE on a dataset of Spanish keywords from our gathered hoaxes. Using this architecture we build a dataset for misinformation detection using NLI in Spanish about COVID-19, as well as track a selection of hoaxes to analyse their spread. FacTr-Check proves to extract insightful information about the spread of many hoaxes, showing aggregate frequency peaks matching COVID-19 waves in Spain. Identified hoaxes have their own particular activity peaks, some have more longevity than others, others are used much more; they are extremely diverse in lifetime and popularity. FacTr-Check relies on external databases to operate, if a rumour reaches the verification pipeline, and there is no related fact-check retrievable on the topic, only similar articles will be retrieved. This means that the verification pipeline is as robust as the fact-check database. Alternatives may include composing a massive database of hoax embeddings, as well as a dynamic information retrieval process to detect new hoaxes and calculate their embeddings. The architecture has been tested on OSNs, meaning that it is blind to outside information such as news sites or other valuable sources of information. If a piece of disinformation is published outside of the OSN, it will be out of the scope of the tracking algorithm. Finally, information is varied, coming in many shapes and forms, including text but also audio, video or images; the verification and tracking pipeline can only work on textual data, meaning that there is room for building systems that support other formats.