Abstract We present an unsupervised method to detect English unergative and unaccusative verbs. These categories allow us to identify verbs participating in the causative-inchoative alternation without knowing the semantic roles of the verb. The method is based on the generation of intransitive sentence variants of candidate verbs and probing a language model. We obtained results on par with similar approaches, with the added benefit of not relying on annotated resources. Introduction As NLP systems push towards Natural Language Understanding, their ability to grasp verb meaning is central. In this paper we present an unsupervised method to detect English unergative and unaccusative verbs. Within the wider category of intransitive verbs, these subgroups show differences in their behaviour, such as (in different languages) auxiliary selection, passivisation, cliticisation and causative-inchoative alternation. These differences are due to the different semantic roles of the subject of unergative verbs, which shares its agentivity with subjects in transitive frames, and that of unaccusative verbs, more similar to the stereotypically patient- or theme-like objects in transitive frames. Moreover, these categories relate to the causative-inchoative alternation (Haspelmath, 1993) in which unaccusative verbs can express a same event with either agent and patient (1-a) or with a patient only (1-b), corresponding respectively to a causative and inchoative interpretation of the event: (1) a. Hannah popped the balloon. b. The balloon popped. The main property of the causative-inchoative alternation is the ability of the patient to be promoted from object to subject, and most theoretical accounts focus on this transitive to intransitive frame change. Once the event is in its intransitive form, however, it is syntactically indistinguishable from any other intransitive verb construction, and in order to categorize the verb one must know the specific semantic roles of its arguments. This phenomenon is particularly hard to mine because the different realisations are not disambiguated by the context but by the arguments of the verb, and the frequency of the constructions themselves is not an indication of their acceptability. Furthermore, the meaning of the sentence remains virtually the same. 1 However, picking up this categorisation is important not only for reasons involving the appropriateness of different types of subjects for each verb, but also because it has been shown to influence coreference patterns (Loáiciga et al., 2018). Nevertheless, efforts to discover verbs participating in the alternation using automatic methods are very limited. Here we focus on the unaccusative vs unergative distinction as it allows us to disambiguate the verbs based on their intransitive frames. While the subjects of unaccusatives are patients (1-b), subjects of unergatives are agents (2-a). The assumption is that alternating verbs belong to the unaccusative category and we can discover them by separating them from the unergative category. 2 (2) a. Hannah slept The key in using these categories is that, without knowing the semantic roles of the verb, we can measure how well a noun fits the subjective position using a large corpus. Our method relies on language modeling to do just this. We investigate the effect of different language models on the task of identifying unaccusatives vs unergatives by testing the intransitive frames of a large quantity of verbs. Related Work Levin’s (1993) seminal work on verb alternations remains the most comprehensive collection of alternating verbs for English. Other collections, for instance Framenet (Baker et al., 1998) also specify if a verb allows the alternation based on Levin. Typological work for other languages exists in the linguistics literature (Haspelmath, 1993; Schäfer, 2009), but large collections are practically nonexistent.3 Building on Haspelmath’s theory, Samardžic´ (2014) estimates a Spontaneity score based on the ratio of a verb’s transitive to intransitive occurrence. In this scale, verbs are ranked according to the degree to which they are non-agentive. In other words, verbs without an explicit agent causing the event are more likely to participate in the causative alternation. Samardžic and Merlo (2018) ´ report between 61% and 85% agreement between their model and theoretical classifications. Kann et al. (2019) rely on Levin’s work to create synthetic data and build classifiers able to discriminate between several alternations. Their data sets are built using proper names as subjects and common nouns as objects, and they focus on the transitive to intransitive construction case. In this paper we rely on intransitive constructions exclusively, as will be explained below in Section 3. In addition, we use their FAVA data set for evaluation in Section 4. Our method is most similar to the RNN-based method reported by Seyffarth (2019). Contrary to our work which queries language models with in- flected sentences, Seyffarth uses an RNN to score artificially created transitive and intransitive argument sequences of the type invite-Pat-Kim vs invite-Pat. Using Framenet as gold standard, they report an accuracy of 66% on all verbs. Conclusions We proposed a method to detect unaccusative vs unergative verbs based on the generation of intransitive sentence frames of candidate verbs. The results with a large language model show moderate success, highlighting that the causative-inchoative alternation is a challenging meaning distinction to detect automatically. Since the method relies primarily on parsed data and language models, it has the potential to be extended to languages where verbal annotated resources are scarce.